Part 2 updates (#9)
Sydney-Informatics-Hub/hello-nextflow: docs/day2/02_fastqc.md

# 2.2 Samplesheets, operators, and groovy  

!!! note "Learning objectives"

    1. Implement a process with a tuple input
    2. Understand why samplesheets should be used to read in data

>     3. Create a channel with operators and Groovy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Build an input channel using operators and Groovy
```

In this step we will implement `01_fastqc.sh` as a process called `FASTQC` and

> use operators and Groovy to create a channel.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use operators and Groovy to create a channel.  We will follow the same process as we did for the previous process. 

Building channels in Nextflow can be tricky. Depending on what data you need to capture and how you want to organise it you will likely need to use [operators](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/operator.html#operators) to manipulate your channel. Sometimes operators alone won't be enough, and you'll need to also use [Groovy](https://groovy-lang.org/documentation.html) (Nextflow's underlying programming language) to capture pertinent information. 

This is an advanced task, as such, we'll provide you with all the code you need. Nextflow doesn't currently provide an inbuilt operator for reading data in from a samplesheet, however it is common practice to use samplesheets in bioinformatics workflows. 
```

Reviewer: Just an idea of how to set expectations at the beginning. Will require rework.

> ![](img/2.excalidraw.png)

Reviewer: Same as previous process, I think we need a diagram with a big more context, can highlight this section.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the bash script `01_fastqc.sh`:
```

```bash title="01_fastqc.sh"
SAMPLE_ID=gut
READS_1="data/ggal/${SAMPLE_ID}_1.fq"
READS_2="data/ggal/${SAMPLE_ID}_2.fq"

mkdir -p "results/fastqc_${SAMPLE_ID}_logs"
fastqc --outdir "results/fastqc_${SAMPLE_ID}_logs" --format fastq ${READS_1} ${READS_2}
```

There's a lot going on in this script, let's break it down.

`SAMPLE_ID=gut` assigns "gut" to the bash variable`SAMPLE_ID`. This is used to:  

- Avoid hardcoding the sample name multiple times in the script  
- Ensure that file pairs of the same sample are processed together  
- Ensure that this script can be run on different sample pairs  

> `READS_1` and `READS_2` specify the paths to the `.fq` files.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`READS_1` and `READS_2` specify the paths to the gut `.fq` files.  
```

Similar to the bash script in the previous step (`00_index.sh`), `mkdir -p`
creates an output folder so that the `fastqc` outputs can be saved here.  

In the `fastqc` command,

- `--outdir` specifies the name of the output directory
- `--format` is a required flag to indicate what format the the reads are in
- `${READS_1}` and `${READS_2}` propagate the paths of the `.fq` files  

## 2.2.1 Building the process  

> Start by adding the following `process` scaffold and script definition:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by adding the following `process` scaffold and script definition to your `main.nf` under the INDEX process code but before the `workflow{}` block:  
```

```groovy title="main.nf"
process FASTQC {
  [ directives ]

  input:
    < process inputs >

  output:
    < process outputs >

  script:
  """
  mkdir -p "fastqc_${sample_id}_logs"
  fastqc --outdir "fastqc_${sample_id}_logs" --format fastq $reads_1 $reads_2
  """
}
```

> Note about ${}  

> Unlike `salmon` from the previous process, `fastqc` requires that the output
> directory be created before running the command, hence the `mkdir ...` line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike `salmon` from the previous process, `fastqc` requires that the output
directory be created before running the command, hence the requirement to run `mkdir -p "fastqc_${sample_id}_logs"` within the `script` block.

Looking at the FastQC command we can see this directory will be our output. 
```

> !!! question "Exercise"
> 
>     Add the output definition
> 
>     ??? note "Solution"
> 
>         ```groovy title="main.nf"
>         output:
>         path "fastqc_${sample_id}_logs"
>         ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! question "Exercise"

    Replace `< process outputs >` with the appropriate output definition for the `FASTQC` process. 
    
  

    ??? note "Solution"

        ```groovy title="main.nf"
        output:
        path "fastqc_${sample_id}_logs"
        ```
```

> There are three inputs for this process definition that can be taken from the
> script definition you just added:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three inputs for this process definition that can be taken from the
script definition you just added:
```
```suggestion
Now we need to define the `input` block for this process. There are three inputs for this process definition that can be taken from the
script definition you just added:
```

1. `$sample_id`
2. `$reads_1`
3. `$reads_2`

> We will use a tuple as the input qualifier as it's useful to group related
> inputs, or, inputs that need to be processed together such as in this case.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to group these inputs together so they can be processed as a single unit. This is a requirement when working with multiple pieces of data that are specific to a sample. 

!!! note "Importance of proper data grouping when using Nextflow"
  
  Nextflow uses channels to run processes in parallel and if you aren't careful about how handle multiple pieces of data that need to be tied together, you may mix datasets up. 
  
   We can use the [input qualifier](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/process.html#inputs) `tuple` to group multiple values into a single input definition. 

In this process, we will use a tuple as the input qualifier because it allows us to group related inputs together. This is useful when we need to process several pieces of data at the same time, like in this case where we have `$sample_id` and its two read files `$reads_1` and `$reads_2`. 

The tuple ensures that these inputs stay linked and are processed as a set, preventing them from getting mixed up with other data.
```

> Add the input definition:  

Reviewer: Replace `< process inputs >` with the input definition: 
```
tuple val(sample_id), path(reads_1), path(reads_2)
```

!!! question "Exercise"

    In your `main.nf` add an input parameter called `reads` and assign the path
    to the samplesheet using `$projectDir`.

    ??? note "Solution"

        ```groovy title="main.nf"
        /*
         * pipeline input parameters
         */
        params.transcriptome_file = "$projectDir/data/ggal/transcriptome.fa"
        params.reads = "$projectDir/data/samplesheet.csv"
        ```

In the next few steps, we will add a mix of Nextflow operators and Groovy
syntax to read in and parse the samplesheet so it is in the correct format
for the process we just added.  

!!! tip

    You do not need to understand what each operator or command does in detail.
    The key takeaway here is to understand that using samplesheets is best
    practice for reading grouped files and metadata into Nextflow, and that
    operators and groovy needs to be chained together to get these in the
    correct format.

Add the following to your workflow scope:  

```groovy title="main.nf"
workflow {
    Channel
        .fromPath(params.reads)
        .splitCsv(header: true)
        .map { row -> [row.sample, file(row.fastq_1), file(row.fastq_2)] }
        .view()
}

> ```

Author: I've incorporated the explanatory text, but leaving open as the workflow chunk needs to be updated
